---
layout: page
title: Results and Conclusion
---

Shown throughout the analysis, the report analyzes gentrification in urban cities and the impact of two federal tax credit programs. The report determines if a neighborhood is eligible for gentrification based on higher poverty rates and lower median income rates. The variables used to determine if a neighborhood had gentrified was less uneducated individuals, less poverty, less unemployment, less renters, and more income. After analyzing neighborhoods, the team determined which neighborhoods gentrified from 2000 to 2010. 

After determining which neighborhoods had or had not gentrified, the team analyzed the two federal tax credit programs. Due to the nature of these programs, the team was comparing apples and oranges because not all neighborhoods that were gentrified were eligible for tax credit programs and eligible tax credit neighborhoods didn't always gentrify. The Median Home Value was often lower in both New Market Tax Credit (NMTC) and Low Income Housing Tax Credit (LIHTC) recipient tracts than non-NMTC and non-LIHTC tracts. Similarly, college graduates and median income was lower in NMTC and LIHTC tracts than non-NMTC and non-LIHTC tracts. The poverty rate, unemployment rate, and proportion of renters were higher in NMTC and LIHTC tracts than non-NMTC and non-LIHTC tracts. However, the median home value growth was higher in NMTC tracts and about the same in LIHTC tracts. Using the models for gentrification, the team determined that Low Income Housing Tax Credits had minimal effect on gentrification. However, New Market Tax Credits had a moderate effect on gentrification. 

Using the predictive analysis of neighborhood change, self-employment had a lower percentage but at a higher density, unemployment had a higher percentage at a lower density, and metro median pay had no effect. Using these three variables, the tax credits had minimal effect on gentrification. As you can see, gentrification can be defined in many different ways and as such, different variables would change the impact of the tax credit program and determine if they were successful. 

The code presented is a basis to determine which census tract variables define gentrification and can be changed or manipulated based on the definition of gentrification. The flexible code allows for a reproducible data process by changing the census tract variables. Using the data wrangling folder and the steps in analysis, variables can be changed and incorporated in a variety of ways therefore determining a different success of the tax credit program. 
